Singleton pattern is one of the simplest design patterns in Java. This type of design pattern comes under creational pattern as this pattern provides one of the best ways to create an object.

This pattern involves a single class which is responsible to create an object while making sure that only single object gets created. This class provides a way to access its only object which can be accessed directly without need to instantiate the object of the class.

Implementation
We're going to create a SingleObject class. SingleObject class have its constructor as private and have a static instance of itself.

SingleObject class provides a static method to get its static instance to outside world. SingletonPatternDemo, our demo class will use SingleObject class to get a SingleObject object


The Singleton pattern is an easy to understand design pattern. Sometimes, there
may be a need to have one and only one instance of a given class during the
lifetime of an application. This may be due to necessity or, more often, due to
the fact that only a single instance of the class is sufficient. For example, we may
need a single database connection object in an application. The Singleton pattern
is useful in such cases because it ensures that there exists one and only one
instance of a particular object ever. Further, it suggests that client objects should
be able to access the single instance in a consistent manner.


Having an instance of the class in a global variable seems like an easy way to
maintain the single instance. All client objects can access this instance in a
consistent manner through this global variable. But this does not prevent clients
from creating other instances of the class. For this approach to be successful, all
of the client objects have to be responsible for controlling the number of instances
of the class. This widely distributed responsibility is not desirable because a client
should be free from any class creation process details. The responsibility for
making sure that there is only one instance of the class should belong to the
class itself, leaving client objects free from having to handle these details.
A class that maintains its single instance nature by itself is referred to as a
Singleton class.